Hi and welcome back.
In this video we'll talk about dates and times.
Working with dates and times
is an extremely useful skill,
but it can be quite confusing.
In this video we'll look at simplifying
working with dates and times slightly
using Python built-in modules.
Now I cannot teach you everything there is to know
about dates and times.
There's just too much and it's always
a contentious and difficult topic,
but I can help you and start you in the journey,
tell you a bit about how I work with dates and times
and how you can work with your users and dates and times.
The main date and time module in Python is called datetime.
And confusingly enough, one of the most important classes
in that module is also called datetime.
So we're gonna be doing from datetime import datetime.
So here we're importing this datetime class
which is going to allow us to do some stuff,
for example datetime.now.
Datetime.now is going to give us the current time
of our operating system.
And as you can see the current time for me is 15:45.
Been recording for awhile, should probably stop soon.
Now this is giving you what's naive datetime object.
A naive object doesn't know about timezones.
So it has no information about the timezone.
Therefore if I give this time to a computer
in the United States it's not going to know
that they should show a different time.
They're are going to think,
okay the time is shown is 3:45, that's cool.
What they don't know is that I am in the UK
and this is a time in the UK.
So without a timezone information like this thing here,
datetime objects are, I'd say,
not very useful.
And that's because you cannot give them to anybody.
You can't show it to your user,
because you don't know if that time is correct
when you're showing it to them.
You don't know where the user is
and where you were when you recorded this time,
so you cannot possibly show them
in a way that's relevant to them.
For example, if I went to the United States
with this time, it would be in the future,
so not great.
So what to do is, we can say print,
oh, oh, oh, not that.
print(datetime.now), but we can also
pass it in the timezone that we want it in.
So for that we have import datetime
and also we have to import timezone
from the datetime module.
And what we're gonna do is say timezone.utc.
UTC is not actually a timezone,
but it is the universal time standard,
it is the central time,
and normally matching GMT
and it essentially allows everybody to talk about time
with the same frame of reference.
So somebody in America who talks about the time in UTC
is going to be talking about the same time
that I'm talking about when I talk about time in UTC.
Even though it's not an actual timezone,
no country follows UTC as a timezone.
If we print this out, you'll see that the time is the same,
but now we have what's called an aware object,
timezone aware object that says, plus 00:00.
What this means is that the current time in UTC
is equal to the time in UTC with no offset.
Okay, so the time here on the left is the UTC time
and now we have that the offset,
where this time was taken is zero.
So now we know it's a UTC time, because the offset is zero.
This time here, was also a UTC time,
but that's because my timezone right now
also has an offset of zero, because right now I am in GMT
and GMT also has an offset of zero compared to UTC.
However, if I did this in the summer
and I did this in the summer as well,
these would be different.
This would show one hour more or less,
I can't remember exactly which way it goes,
but it will show a different time
because I would be in BST, 'cause the UK changes timezone
with daylight savings.
So why am I slowing down so much with this thing.
It's really important that you get dates correct.
Otherwise your application is gonna be showing your users
times in the past or in the future.
It's gonna be really confusing.
So what I normally recommend is
your programmes should always work with UTC times.
Store UTC times in your database,
work with UTC times in your code.
When a user gives you a time, like if you ask them,
enter the current date, convert that to UTC,
and work with UTC.
And you shall only convert it to a different timezone
when you show the user the time.
So if I go to America and I have this time stored,
what I can do is I can say this time was taken
in a timezone plus zero,
let's convert it now to minus seven
when we go to some place in America.
Subtract seven hours from this
and now I can show this in their timezone
and the date and time will now match.
So only when you show it to a user,
which you must know their timezone
in order to do that of course,
you convert it to their timezone.
All the rest of the time, you're working with UTC
and that's just gonna simplify things massive.
Okay, so something else that you can do is of course
you can do timedeltas, timedelta.
A timedelta is a just a difference in time.
So you can say that for example,
today is datetime.now and timezone.utc
and tomorrow is today plus timedelta days equal one.
What this does, is it gets your current date,
date and time and it adds a timedelta,
which is a difference in time.
The delta, I think comes from mathematics.
Essentially it just means a difference in time
and the difference that you're applying,
that you're adding is one day, 24 hours.
Now of course the time is going to be the same time
tomorrow as it is today.
So again, print today, print tomorrow,
run this thing, show it to you
and we have the 10th of February at 15:51,
11th of February at 15:51.
So as you can see, same everything except for the day.
And now this leads nicely into the next thing.
If you want to format the date
and show it in a slightly nicer way you can do that.
So that's good.
And normally you'd see of course,
if you're in the UK, you'd see the day in front,
then the month and then then year.
And if you're in America,
you would have a very weird way of doing things
and you'd show the month first.
Or if your Python, you show the day last,
which is just...
There's actually a reason for this,
which is for sorting.
The year goes first, then the month,
and then the day for sorting.
And, but of course for readability, not so great.
So what you can do, is you can do
print today.strftime, that means string format time.
And inside the brackets you give it
the format that you want.
So in my case I'm going to do dash d,
sorry %d-%m-%Y, big Y, that's important, %H-%M.
Percent d tells the strftime function, our method,
to print out the days, so that's gonna be 10.
Percent little m, it says months,
percent big Y says the year a four digit.
Percent H gives you the hours
and percent M gives you the minutes.
So you can print this out
and you can see that you get now a nice format,
where the day is in front, then the month,
and the year, 10th of February, 2018.
The time is 15:53 and we have lost some precision there,
but you can regain it if you want by adding %s there.
And you can see you get 40 now.
You can also add in the milliseconds
and the timezone information as well if you want.
What's important to remember is that this printout here,
doesn't have the timezone information printed out,
but the object itself still has the timezone information,
okay, we've not lost that, we've just not printed it out,
because the way we formatted the string
matches this data that we've asked for.
Okay, similarly, oh sorry deleted that.
You can ask the user for the date,
like user date is input.
Enter the date in YYYY-mm-dd format
and then you can convert it,
datetime.strptime, this case, user_date, %y-%m-%d.
And make sure to have a big Y there.
And then you can print user_date out.
Let's print it out.
I'll explain what it is in a moment.
Now we can see that it asks for a particular date,
let's say in 2010-05-05
and now we get 2010-05-05 00:00:00.
We don't have timezone information in here either.
So what's happening?
We've asked the datetime module to call the strptime,
which means string parse time.
This is string format time.
Parse time.
Then we've put in our string that we want to parse.
That's whatever the user entered,
presumably in this format, YYYY-mm-dd.
And then we've said, okay, and by the way
this string is gonna be in this format
so now you can understand.
%Y is four digit year, %m is two digit months,
%d is two digit days.
So now the strptime function has the date and it's format
and it can join it together
and give us a new datetime object
that has the appropriate data in it.
But of course we've not given it the hours, minutes,
or seconds so all those default to zero.
Notice how we don't have any timezone information there.
We'll have to ask the user
for timezone information separately
and we would have to include it in this parse string.
Or in deed if we wanted to print it out,
we'd have to print it out down here.
I can't remember from the top of my head exactly
what percent it is.
I think it's %zed, but I am going to include a PDF
on dating parsing and formatting, just these things here,
what they mean and how you use them,
attached to the resources section of this lecture.
So don't go anywhere.
Download that if you're keen on knowing a bit more
about these dates, how you'd format them,
and how you parse them and yeah.
I just wanted to tell you a bit about these datetime module,
some of the things you can do with it.
Other thing you can do by the way,
timedelta you can have hours, you can have minutes,
you can have seconds, you can have weeks in there.
So there's a few things you can do
in terms of adding timedeltas there.
You can of course subtract timedeltas as well if you want.
There's more to do with dates and times,
but I cannot possibly cover all of the datetime module
without boring you to death, first of all,
and also without some more specific use case for these.
So if you do have an questions about dates and times
ask away in the Slack Channel,
even if they're all related to the course,
I'll be glad to help you out.
And that's really the best way to continue going about it.
As you have questions about date and time, find out,
research through the Python official documentation,
what other people ask in Slack and in Stack Overflow
and that's really going to give you
any other tools that you need.
But in terms of dealing with simple dates and times
in your programmes, this should be enough to get you started.
You've datetime objects, timedeltas,
and you know about timezones as well.
And you also are able to format the time
and parse any user input as well.
So that's it for this video.
I hope you've liked it and I'll see you on the next one.